## Assignment 4 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**1. There are $N$​ computers in a network, labelled $\{1, 2, 3, . . . , N\}$​. There are $M$​ one-directional links which connect pairs of computers. Computer 1 is trying to send a virus to computer $N$​. This can happen as long as there is a path of links from computer 1 to computer $N$​. To prevent this, you’ve decided to remove some of the links from the network so that the two computers are no longer connected. For each link, you’ve calculated the cost of removing it. What is the minimum total cost to disconnect the computers as required, and which edges should be removed to achieve this minimum cost? (25 pts)**

This problem can be visualised as a max flow/min cut problem. Construct a flow network graph $G(V, E)$ such that the computers are represented as the vertices and the one-directional links as directed edges, pointing from one computer to the other. Furthermore, let computer 1 be the source and computer $N$​​ be the sink. For each directed edge, we define the capacity as the cost of removing a link between the pair of computers.

Find the max flow from the source to the sink by using the Edmonds-Karp algorithm. Once completed, find the minimum cut in the graph. By the max-flow min-cut theorem, if the edges in the minimum cut are removed, then this would disconnect a path from the source to the sink. Hence, the edges that crosses the minimum cut should be removed and the total capacity of these edges is the minimum cost to disconnect the computers.

As the highest cost of this algorithm comes from the Edmonds-Karp algorithm, we know that it runs in $O(|V| \times |E|^2)$​​​ where $V$​​​ are the vertices and $E$​​​​​ are the edges of the graph. Since the $N$​​​ computers are the vertices, and $M$​​ one-directional links representing the edges in $G$​, the overall time complexity of this algorithm is $O(N \times M^2)$​​​​​ as the maximum operation cost was derived from the Edmonds-Karp algorithm.

