## Assignment 4 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**3. A large group of children has assembled to play a modified version of hopscotch. The squares appear in a line, numbered from 0 to $n$, and a child is successful if they start at square 0 and make a sequence of jumps to reach square $n$. However, each child can only jump at most $k \lt n$ squares at a time, i.e., from square $i$ they can reach squares $i + 1, i + 2, . . . , i + k$ but not $i + k + 1$, and a child cannot clear the entire game in one jump. An additional rule of the game specifies an array $A[1, . . . , n − 1]$, where $A[i]$ is the maximum number of children who can jump on square $i$. Assuming the children co-operate, what is the largest number of children who can successfully complete the game? (25 pts)**

*Hint: Connect every square $i$ with squares $i+1, . . . , i+k$​ with a directed edge of infinite capacity. Now limit the capacity of each square appropriately and use max flow.*

The problem can be represented as a max-flow problem. Construct a network flow graph $G(V,E)$​​ where each square $i$​​ is represented as a vertex $v_i$​ and all $k$​ squares that a child can reach in one jump from square $i$​ be represented as directed edges with infinite capacity. Let square 0 be the source and square $n$​ as the sink. 

Note that for each square $i$, there is a constraint such that $A[i]$ is the maximum number of children that can jump the square. Thus, all vertices $v_i$ (excluding the source and sink) has a vertex capacity to consider in the network flow. For every vertex $v_i$ (except the source and sink), split the vertex into two nodes, $v_{in}$ and $v_{out}$, such that all incoming edges to $v_i$ are now connected to $v_{in}$ and all outgoing edges from $v_i$ are connected from  $v_{out}$. Construct a directed edge from $v_{in}$ to $v_{out}$ and set the edge to have the maximum capacity of $A[i]$​. This ensures that a bottleneck exists within the flow network so that we can find the maximum flow.

Use the Edmonds-Karp algorithm and after completion, we can find the maximum flow by seeing what is the total flow leaving the source and entering the sink. This gives the largest number of children who can successfully complete the game.

The time complexity for the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is defined as $O(|V| \times |E|^2)$​​​​​ where $V$​​​​​ are the set of vertices and $E$​​​​​ are the set of edges on the graph. There are $O(n)$​​​​​​ squares representing the vertices of the graph. There are also $O(nk)$​​ edges as for each $i^{th}$​​​ square, there exists an edge connecting up to $k$​​ squares. Therefore, the overall time complexity of this algorithm costs $O(n \times (nk)^2) = O(n^3k^2)$​​​​​​​​​​​​ as the Edmonds-Karp algorithm was the highest cost operation.

