## Assignment 4 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**4. Use max flow algorithm to solve the following problem. You are given a usual $n \times n$​​​​ chess board with $k$​​​​ white bishops on the board at the given cells $(a_i , b_i)$​​​​, $(1 \le a_i , b_i \le n, 1 \le i \le k)$​​​​. You have to determine the largest number of black rooks you can place on the board so that no two rooks are in the same row or in the same column or are under the attack of any of the $k$ bishops (recall that bishops go diagonally). (25 pts)**

The problem can be represented as a max flow/min cut problem. Construct a bipartite graph $G(V,E)$​​​​ such that the $n$​​​​ rows represents the vertices on the left side and the $n$​​ columns represents the vertices on the right side of the graph. Now, we need to create our directed edges in the network. Every square $(r_i, c_j)$​​ on the board can be represented in the bipartite graph by connecting a directed edge from row $r_i$​​ to column $c_j$​​. To find the largest number of black rooks that can be placed, for each row $r_i$​​, construct a directed edge to the column vertices $c_j$ with a maximum capacity of 1​​ if square $(r_i,c_j)$​​​​ **does not meet any** of the following properties below:

- If square $(r_i, c_j)$​ can be attacked by any of the $k$ bishops
- If there already exists a chess piece (i.e. a white bishop) on square $(r_i,c_j)$​​, assuming that there can be only one chess piece on each square on the board.

Now add a super source $S$ which connects to all the rows vertices $r_i$ and a super sink $T$ connecting all the column vertices $c_j$ and set the maximum capacity of the edges to 1 as this ensures that no two rooks will be in the same row or in the same column.

Use the Edmonds-Karp algorithm to find the max flow of this network. Find the minimum cut as that the total capacity of the edges crosses the minimum cut gives us the maximum flow of the network which equals to the largest number of black rooks you can place on the board so that no two rooks are in the same row or in the same column or are under the attack of any of the $k$​​ bishops.

The operation cost of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is $O(|V| \times |E|^2)$​​​ where $V$​​​ are the vertices and $E$​​​​ are the edges of the graph. In this flow network bipartite graph, $G$​​​ has $O(n)$​​​ vertices and $O(n^2)$​​​ edges as for each of the $n$​ rows, it connects to $O(n)$​ column vertices. Hence, the overall time complexity of this algorithm is given by $O(n^5)$​​​​​ since the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is the most costly operation.

