### ping

- check connectivity to a host (to check if a host operating and network connections are intact). A small packet is sent through the network to a particular IP address.

```bash
ping <host>

# -s packetsize specifies the number of data bytes to be sent. The default is 56 Bytes (Linux).
ping -s <packetsize> <host>

# -i interval specifies the interval between sending ping requests. The default is one second.
ping -i <interval> <host>
```

### traceroute

- traces the route that an IP packet follows from your host to another Internet host

```bash
traceroute <host>
```

### telnet

- used to connect from one host to another (remote login) via the internet network

```bash
telnet <host> [port]
```

### ssh

- set of standards and an associated network protocol that allows establishing a secure channel between a local and a remote computer

```bash
ssh -l <username> <hostname>
ssh username@hostname
```

### nslookup, dig, host

- find out the corresponding IP address of a host name, querying DNS nameservers for information and performing DNS lookups.

Below, you may also find a short description of the sections, which are returned by the dig command.

- HEADER: This displays the dig command version number, the global options used by the dig command, and few additional header information.
- QUESTION SECTION: This displays the question it asked the DNS. i.e This is one's input. If one has given the command dig WEBSITE, dig will indicate in this section the WEBSITE (e.g. cnn.com) that we asked for along with the type of the query. The default type dig command uses is "A record".
- ANSWER SECTION: This displays the answer it receives from the DNS. i.e This is the output. For the default query type, this displays the "A record" of the WEBSITE (e.g. cnn.com).
- AUTHORITY SECTION: This displays the DNS name server that has the authority to respond to this query. Basically this displays available name servers of the website.
- ADDITIONAL SECTION: This displays the ip address of the name servers listed in the AUTHORITY SECTION. Stats section at the bottom displays few dig command statistics including how much time it took to execute this query.

### ifconfig

The **ifconfig** utility is used to assign an address to a network interface and to configure or display the current network interface configuration information. It must be used at system startup to define the network address of each interface present on a machine. After system startup, it can also be used to redefine an interface's address and its other operating parameters. If a single interface argument is given, it displays the status of the given interface only; if a single -a argument is given, it displays the status of all interfaces. Otherwise, it configures an interface.

### netstat

The **netstat** utility allows to print the various data related to the network configuration of a station. Here, we show only two forms of this command:

Option -i allows to print the state of the network interfaces (e.g. eth0 or lo).

The MTU and Met fields show the current MTU and metric values for that interface. The RX and TX columns show how many packets have been received or transmitted error-free (RX-OK/TX-OK) or damaged (RX-ERR/TX-ERR); how many were dropped (RX-DRP/TX-DRP); and how many were lost because of an overrun (RX-OVR/TX-OVR).

The last column shows the flags that have been set for this interface. These characters are one-character versions of the long flag names that are printed when you display the interface configuration with **ifconfig** :

- B - A broadcast address has been set
- L - This interface is a loopback device
- M - All packets are received (promiscuous mode)
- O - ARP is turned off for this interface
- P - This is a point-to-point connection
- R - Interface is running
- U - Interface is up

When you invoke **netstat** with the -r flag, it displays the kernel routing table. The -n option makes **netstat** print addresses as dotted quad IP numbers rather than the symbolic host and network names. This option is especially useful when you want to avoid address lookups over the network (e.g., to a DNS or NIS server).

The second column of **netstat** 's output shows the gateway to which the routing entry points. If no gateway is used, an asterisk is printed instead. The third column shows the "generality" of the route, i.e., the network mask for this route. The fourth column displays the following flags that describe the route:

- G - The route uses a gateway
- U - The interface to be used is up
- H - Only a single host can be reached through the route
- D - This route is dynamically created. It is set if the table entry has been generated by a routing daemon like gated or by an ICMP redirect message
- M - This route is set if the table entry was modified by an ICMP redirect message
- ! - The route is a reject route and datagrams will be dropped

### netperf

The **netperf** utility provides tests for both unidirectional throughput and end-to-end latency. The calculation of these parameters is based on measuring the time necessary to transmit messages of fixed size by TCP.

The most common use of **netperf** is measuring bulk data transfer performance. This is also referred to as "stream" or "unidirectional stream" performance. Essentially, these tests will measure how fast one system can send data to another and/or how fast that other system can receive it. Request/response performance is the second area that can be investigated with **netperf** . Generally speaking, **netperf** request/response performance is quoted as "transactions/s" for a given request and response size. A transaction is defined as the exchange of a single request and a single response. From a transaction rate, one can infer one way and round-trip average latency.

```bash
netperf host [message_size [count]]
```

The obligatorily parameter is the name or address of a destination towards which we want to measure the performance. The optional parameters are the size of the messages (in Bytes, by default 1024) and the number of messages to be sent (if the latter is not specified, netperf sends messages until you stop it by Ctrl-C).

**netperf** prints a statistics report regularly (approximately every second) in a table of 5 columns with the following heading:

```
Total Delta | Avg 1 Avg 10 Avg (kbits/s)
```

"Total" is the total number of messages sent since the launching of netperf; "Delta" is the number of messages sent since the preceding report/ratio; "Avg 1" is the average throughput since the preceding report; "Avg 10" is the average throughput during the last 10 reports; "Avg" is the average throughput since the launching of netperf. All the throughputs are expressed in Kbit/s.

