## Assignment 2 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**1. You are given a sequence of $n$ songs where the $i^{th}$ song is $l_i$ minutes long. You want to place all of the songs on an ordered series of CDs (e.g. $CD_1$, $CD_2$, $CD_3$, . . . $CD_k$) where each CD can hold $m$ minutes. Furthermore,** 

**(a) The songs must be recorded in the given order, song 1, song 2, . . ., song $n$.**

**(b) All songs must be included.** 

**(c) No song may be split across CDs.** 

**Your goal is to determine how to place them on the CDs as to minimize the number of CDs needed. Give the most efficient algorithm you can to find an optimal solution for this problem, prove the algorithm is correct and analyze its time complexity.**

Loop through each song in the given order. For the given $i^{th}$ song, assume $l_i \le m$ and now consider if $l_i$ minutes can be appended to the current CD. If the $i^{th}$ song can be added to the current CD with the final contents size being less than or equal to $m$ minutes, then the $i^{th}$ song is appended. Otherwise, if the remaining free space on the CD is less than $l_i$ minutes, then the $i^{th}$ song is instead placed in the next CD. Continue in this manner where we are using the greedy method to append as much songs that the current CD can hold under $m$ minutes to find an ordered series of CDs.

To prove that this algorithm is optimal, let our greedy solution above be denoted as $G$ and assume that there also exists an optimal solution, denoted by $G'$, that produces the same ordered series of CDs but with a different assignment of songs for some CDs. Lets say that on the first CD of $G$ that there are $j$ songs included and on the first CD of $G'$ that there are $i$ songs included where $i \ne j$. Since the greedy solution appends as much songs as possible, the first CD of $G$ would contain more songs that the first CD of $G'$, thus $j \gt i$. Lets say that $j - i$ songs exists that violates this greedy policy and is assigned in the second CD in $G'$ compared to the greedy solution $G$ where it is assigned to the first CD. Since this violates our greedy policy, the first CD in $G$ must still have the remaining space to fit $j - i$ songs such that the CD contents will be less than or equal to $m$ minutes. If we repeatedly shift back the assignments of songs to the previous CD if there is remaining space available, then eventually, we reach an assignment for $G'$ that adheres to the greedy solution. Thus, the greedy solution above is optimal.

The time complexity for this greedy solution is $O(n)$ as we are iterating over $n$ songs and the operation of allocating one song to a CD would only have the complexity of $O(1)$ each time. Thus, the overall complexity for this algorithm is $O(n)$.