## Assignment 2 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**2. At a trade school, there are $N$ workers looking for jobs, each with a skill level $x_i$. There are $P$ entry-level job openings, and the $i^{th}$ opening only accepts workers with a skill level less than or equal to $p_i$ . There are also $Q$ senior job openings, the $i$ of which requires a skill level of at least $q_i$ . Each worker can take at most one job, and each job opening only accepts a single worker. Your task is to determine the largest number of workers you can assign to jobs in time $O(N log N + P log P + Q log Q).$**

For each worker with a skill level of $x_i$, we can represent a worker as an element of an array of workers. Sort the workers by their skill level $x_i$ using a merge sort in ascending order whereby the worker with the lowest skill level is at the beginning of the array. The time complexity of this operation is $O(NlogN)$ where $N$ is the number of workers looking for jobs. 

For each $i^{th}$ job in $P$, we can represent it as an element of an array of $P$ entry-level job openings. Sort $P$ by the skill level $p_i$ in increasing order using a merge sort, whereby the job with the lowest skill level is located at the beginning of the sorted array. This  operation has the time complexity of $O(PlogP)$ where $P$ is the number of entry-level job openings.

Similarly, for the $Q$ senior job openings, sort the array in decreasing order such that the senior job which has the highest skill level requirement $q_i$ is at the beginning of the sorted array. Time complexity of this operation is $O(QlogQ)$ where $Q$ is the number of senior job openings.

To begin with, have a counter variable, lets call $w$, and initialise $w = 0$. Starting with the entry-level jobs, loop through the sorted array of $P$. For each $i^{th}$ job, first check if the current worker at index $w$ meets the skill level for the $i^{th}$ job such that $N[w] \le p_i$ where $N[w] = x_i$. If that worker's skill level $x_i \le p_i$, assign that worker to that $i^{th}$ job opening, increment $w$ and loop though the next job opening. If such worker has the skill level $x_i \gt p_i$, this means there exist no available workers that meets the requirements for the $i^{th}$ job opening. Instead, loop through the next job opening without incrementing $w$. Continue until we have finished looping over $P$ jobs or when $w \ge N$ since this means that there are no more workers to assign a job. This operation has the overall time complexity of $O(P)$ since we are looping over $P$ entry-level jobs and we are instead directly accessing each worker by the index which has the operation cost of $O(1)$ each time.

Next to assign the $Q$ senior job openings, we set $w = N - 1$, since senior level jobs have a minimum to accept workers with a skill level of at least $q_i$. Loop through each job in $Q$. For each $i^{th}$ job, check whether the worker's skill level at index $w$ is $N[w] \ge q_i.$ If true, assign the worker at index $w$ to that $i^{th}$ job and decrement $w$ by 1. Otherwise, go through the next job in the array without decrementing $w$. Continue until we have looped over all $Q$ jobs or until there are no more workers available to assign jobs. This operation has the time complexity of $O(Q)$ since we are looping over $Q$ entry-level jobs.

This algorithm has the time complexity of $O(N log N + P log P + Q log Q + P + Q)$ from sorting arrays $N$, $P$ and $Q$ and as well as looping over the $P$ and $Q$ jobs to determine the largest possible number of workers to assign jobs. However, by definition of Big Oh, it takes the asymptotic upper bound of a function and focuses on the most significant computation of complexity, meaning that 
$$
O(N log N + P log P + Q log Q + P + Q) = O(N log N + P log P + Q log Q).
$$
Thus, finding largest number of workers to assign jobs takes time overall time complexity of $O(N log N + P log P + Q log Q)$. The following pseudocode below describes the mentioned algorithm above.



```pseudocode
merge_sort(N) IN ASCENDING ORDER
merge_sort(P) IN ASCENDING ORDER
merge_sort(Q) IN DESCENDING ORDER

w = 0
p_assigned = 0

FOR p_job IN P
	IF w < N.length AND N[w].skill_level <= p_job.skill_level THEN
		assign p_job to the worker at index w
		increment w by 1
		increment p_assigned by 1
	END IF
END FOR

w = N.length - 1
q_assigned = 0

FOR q_job IN Q
	IF w >= 0 AND N[w].skill_level >= q_job.skill_level AND 
	N[w] has not been assigned a job THEN
		assign q_job to the worker at index w
		decrement w by 1
		increment q_assigned by 1
	END IF
END FOR

total_workers_assigned = p_assigned + q_assigned
RETURN total_workers_assigned
```

