## Assignment 2 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**3. A city is attacked by $N$ monsters and is defended by a single hero with initial strength of $S$ units. To kill a monster $i$ the hero must dissipate $a_i$ units of strength; if monster $i$ is killed successfully the hero gains $g_i$ units of strength. Thus, if the hero had strength $c \ge a_i$ before tackling monster $i$ he can kill the monster and he will end up with $c − a_i + g_i$ units of strength. Note that for some monsters $i$ you might have $g_i \ge a_i$ but for some other $j$ you might have $a_j > g_j$ . You are given $S$ and for each $i$ you are given $a_i$ and $g_i$ . Design an algorithm which determines in which order the hero can fight the monsters if he is to kill them all (if there is such an ordering). In case there is no such ordering the algorithm should output “no such ordering”. Assume all values are positive integers.**

For each monster $i$, find how much strength is gained if the hero supposedly killed it taking into account how much $a_i$ units of strength is needed in the first place to kill that monster. Lets say $p_i$ is the difference of $g_i - a_i$. A greedy approach would be killing monsters starting with the largest $p_i$ as this would give the hero the largest strength gained. We can represent each monster as an element within an array. Firstly, we sort the monsters based on $p_i$ in descending order whereby the monster with the highest $p_i$ is at the beginning of the array. Using a merge sort operation gives us the complexity of $O(NlogN)$ where $N$ is the number of monsters. 

To determine which order the hero can fight the monsters, we can use two nested loops where the outer loop iterates over $N$ times (representing that there are $N$ monsters to kill). The outer loop keeps tracks on how many monsters the hero have currently killed. In our inner loop, we iterate over the sorted monsters array. The inner loop is used to determine which monster with the highest $p_i$ is killable given the hero's current strength $c$. For each iteration of the inner loop, go through each monster with $p_i$ that is alive and kill it if and only if the hero strength $c \ge a_i$. We used this condition as a means of whether or not the the hero has the current strength $c$ to dissipate $a_i$ units of strength to kill monster $i$. If killed, this gives us the monster in the sequence that the hero should kill in order to kill them all. We can stop the inner loop and proceed to the next iteration of the outer loop which determines the next monster to kill in the order. If the hero is unable to kill a monster when iterating over the inner loop, this means that there is "no such ordering" the hero can fight the monsters. Overall, this algorithm gives at the complexity $O(N^2)$ at the worst case due to iterating over $N$ monsters $N$ times.