## Assignment 2 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**4. You are given $n$ stacks of blocks. The $i^{th}$ stack contains $h_i \gt 0$ identical blocks. You are also able to move for any $i \le n − 1$ any number of blocks from stack $i$ to stack $i + 1$. Design an algorithm to find out in $O(n)$ time whether it is possible to make the sizes of stacks strictly increasing. (For example, 1,2,3,4 are strictly increasing but 1,2,2,3 are not). The input for your algorithm is an array $A$ of length $n$ such that $A[i] = h_i$ . Note that you are not asked to actually move the blocks, only to determine if such movements exists or not.**

To determine if such a movement exists, we need to loop through each stack in $A$. We can approach this problem by first initialising a counter variable that keeps track on the number of free blocks to move from the stack $i$ to stack $i+1$. We can determine if we can make the sizes of the stacks strictly increasing by comparing if it is possible to have the $i^{th}$ stack in the array to have $i$ number of blocks where $i$ is the position index of the stack in $A$. A greedy approach would be if it is possible for making the $n$ stacks of blocks to contain blocks in the sequence of $0, 1, 2, ... , n - 1$. 

Loop through each stack in $A$. For each $i^{th}$ stack, determine how many possible number of blocks (both the number of blocks $h_i$ from stack $i$ and blocks that can be moved over from the previous stack) are available that the current stack $i$ could be allocated with. We then check if the number of blocks available is greater than or equal to the current index position of stack $i$. If true, this means that for stack $i$, it is possible for such movement to exist to make that stack $i$ to be greater than the previous stack by 1 block. We can then set the counter variable such that any leftover blocks from stack $i$ can be moved over to stack $i + 1$. If false, this means that there is not enough free blocks available, then no movements exists for the sizes of stacks to be strictly increasing. Once the loop has finished, if there the counter variable that tracks the free blocks is greater or equal to 0, this means such a movement exists for the sizes of stacks strictly increasing. 

This algorithm gives us the time complexity of $O(n)$ as we are only looping through $n$ stacks of blocks once. The following pseudocode below expresses the mentioned algorithm.

```pseudocode
free_blocks_counter = 0
FOR h IN A
	total_blocks = free_blocks_counter + h 
    IF total_blocks >= h.index THEN
      free_blocks_counter += h - h.index
    ELSE
    	PRINT "No such movement exists"
    	RETURN
    END IF
END FOR
PRINT "Such movement exists"
```

