## Assignment 2 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**5. You are given $n$ jobs where each job takes one unit of time to finish. Job $i$ will provide a profit of $g_i$ dollars ($g_i > 0$) if finished at or before time $t_i$ , where $t_i$ is an arbitrary integer larger or equal to 1. Only one job can be done at any instant of time and jobs have to be done continuously from start to finish. (Note: If a job $i$ is not finished by $t_i$ then there is no benefit in scheduling it at all. All jobs can start as early as time 0.) Give the most efficient algorithm you can to find a schedule that maximizes the total profit.**

We can represent the jobs as an array where each element is job $i$. Sort the jobs using a merge sort by the profits $g_i$ in decreasing order of profits earned. This operation gives us the complexity of $O(nlogn)$ where $n$ is number of jobs. We are then able to identify which jobs to prioritise scheduling first as the jobs with the most profits earned are located in beginning of the array.

Using the greedy method, we first pick the job in the sorted array of jobs and find the latest timeslot available in the schedule starting from the starting time all the way up to job's deadline $t_i$. Allocate the job to a free timeslot that is most closest to deadline $t_i$. Continue this process for every job $i$ in the sorted array or until every timeslot in the schedule has been allocated a job . If job $i$ cannot be allocated, then it means that there is not any free timeslot and we should move on to the next job in the array. This greedy approach finds a schedule that maximizes the total profit.

This algorithm gives us the complexity of $O(n^2)$ as we are looping over $n$ job in the sorted array and then for each job $i$, we are then doing another nested loop to find an available timeslot to schedule that job $i$.