## Assignment 1 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**1. You are given an array $A$ of $n$ distinct positive integers.** 

**(a) Design an algorithm which decides in time $O(n^2\log{n})$ (in the worst case) if there exist four distinct integers $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ in $A$ such that $m^2 + s = k + p^2$. (10 points)**

To find if there exist four distinct integers $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ in $A$ such that $m^2 + s = k + p^2$, we can loop through each element in $A$ twice to determine if there is a combination of elements that satisfy the result.

Given the result  $m^2 + s = k + p^2$, we know that both sides of the equation are equal. Lets rearrange the equation such that $m^2 + s = p^2 + k$. As such, lets focus on one side of the equation for now and find all possible values for $m^2 + s$ in $A$. To find all possible values for $m^2 + s$, we first loop through all elements in $A$ such that the current element in the iteration would be $m$. Then, within that iteration, we can loop all $n-1$ elements in $A$ as we are excluding the element $m$ since $m$ and $s$ must be distinct values. Now, let say that the current element in looping $n-1$ elements is $s$. Thus, we can find possible combinations for $m^2 + s$. Likewise this method will also allow us to find all combinations of $p^2 + k$ as well since as stated $m^2 + s = k + p^2$. From this, the result for each computation of $m^2 + s$ can be stored in a new array $B$.

Thus, there are $O(n^2)$ elements in $B$ since this algorithm it is iterating over $A$ twice. Now, array $B$ contains all possible combinations of the value from $m^2 + s$ and $p^2 + k$ where $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ are distinct values.

Now, to determine if there exist four distinct integers  $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ in A such that  $m^2 + s = p^2 + k$, $B$ would contain two elements with the same value, since it would contain all possible values for $m^2 + s$ and $p^2 + k$. We can determine this in the worst case $O(n^2\log{n})$ by first sorting $B$ then scanning the array for duplicate values.

Using a sorting algorithm such as a merge sort on $B$ would take $O(n^2\log{n^2})$ since a merge sort on an array occurs in $O(n\log{n})$ where $n$ is the number of elements. However, for the array $B$, there are $n^2$ elements as stated. Thus, a merge sort on $B$ would take $O(n^2\log{n^2})$.  However, $n^2\log{n^2} = 2n^2\log{n} = O(n^2\log{n})$. Go through the sorted array and if a number appears at least twice then $A$ has four distinct integers $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ in $A$ such that $m^2 + s = k + p^2$.

**(b) Solve the same problem but with an algorithm which runs in the expected time of $O(n^2)$. (10 points)**

To solve the same problem in $O(n^2)$, we can use a hash table to store the calculations of $m^2 + s$ and $p^2 + k$. To do this, we can iterate over $A$ twice and hash all sums. We then check by brute force if a sum has appeared at least twice. If it has, this would immediately tell us that there exist four distinct integers  $m$, $s$, $k$, $p$ in A such that  $m^2 + s = p^2 + k$.