## Assignment 3 - Gabriel Angelo Ting (z5312799)

**3. In a pond there is a sequence on $n$ lily pads arranged in a straight line: $1, 2, 3 . . . n$. On lily pad $i$ there are $fi \ge 0$ flies. On lily pad 1 there is a frog sitting. The frog can only jump forward from a lily pad $i$ to either lily pad $i + 3$ or lily pad $i + 4$. Find the largest number of flies that the frog can catch. (20 pts)** 

*Hint: be careful: not all lily pads are accessible to the frog; the frog can only jump from the starting lily pad 1 to lily pads 4 and 5 but cannot access lily pads 2 and 3. Also, for some $i$ there might be no flies on that lily pad (i.e., $f_i = 0$). So you want to distinguish between lily pads without flies but which are accessible and lily pads which are not accessible.*

First, define the subproblem such that we find the largest number of files the frog can catch until reaching to lily pad $i$​​​​​​​​​​, where $i \gt 1$​​​​​​​​​​​​. Initialise an array, lets call $F$​​​​​​​​, containing $n$​​​​​​​​ elements all set to 0 so that when evaluating the subproblems, we can use memoization to cache previous results on the number of flies the frog catches on the $i^{th}$​​​​​​​​ lily pads to be used in later computations. For each subproblem, we can determine the optimal solution on the number of flies the frog catches until reaching the $i^{th}$​​​​​​​​ lily pad with the formula $F[i] = max\{F[i-3],F[i-4]\} + f_i$​​​​​​​​ where $i \gt 3$​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​ and assuming that the first index of $F$​​​ starts at 1. Set the base case to $F[1] = f_1$​​​​ which represents the first lily pad having $f_i$​​​​ flies.​

To obtain a final solution, first loop $i$ over $n$ lily pads starting from $i = 4 $. For each $i^{th}$ lily pad, we can utilised the recurrence we defined earlier, $F[i] = max\{F[i-3],F[i-4]\} + f_i$, to set the values of the flies the frog caught at the $i^{th}$ lily pad. The costs occurs in constant as we are directly accessing and reusing the computed result in $F$. Since we have stated that all elements in $F$ has been set to 0 initially, this means that inaccessible lily pads can be distinguished to accessible ones. After solving all subproblems and populating $F$ with the number of flies caught for each lily pad, we can loop through $F$ once again, populated with the total number of flies a frog could catch on the $i^{th}$​ lily pad and find the largest element which is the optimal solution.

The overall time complexity of this algorithm is $O(n)$ since we are computing the flies the frog catches on the $i^{th}$ lily pads and using $F$​ to cache previous computations accessing elements in constant time.
